KEP-3488: promote validatingadmissionpolicy to beta (#3949)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/3488-cel-admission-control/README.md

We want to support per namespace configuration with namespace scoped param resources.

(Thanks for the input from @dead2k)
This sort of mapping allows:
- A cluster-admin can write a single resource to say, “this is the policy I want in all my namespaces”.
- If namespace admins can read the param resources, but not write that resource, they can understand the limitations they currently have.
- A single lenient cluster policy and cluster policybinding can enforce the minimum constraint, and a single cluster policy with a cluster policybinding pointing to a namespace level param can further restrict.

A new optional field `namespaceParamRef` could be added inside ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding to support such use case.
In contrast, a namespace scoped policybinding will require creation and maintenance of both policybindings and parameters
in every namespace to enforce the policy itself, versus the single policybinding and many parameters.

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding
metadata:
  name: "demo-binding-test.example.com"
spec:
  policyName: "demo-policy.example.com"
  namespaceParamRef:

>     name: "param-resource.example.com"

Reviewer: I think we want an option of name or label selector here to mean, "this particular one" or  "honor all the parameter resources that match this label selector in that namespace" to allow slightly looser coupling.   That allows evolution of namespace names using a kustomize style  hash in each namespace with a single ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding working against many namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Added. I haven't showed a kustomize example, but I have shown one with a label selector along with a summary of the behavior if the selector matches multiple resources.

Reviewer: > Added. I haven't showed a kustomize example, but I have shown one with a label selector along with a summary of the behavior if the selector matches multiple resources.

Commit https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3949/commits/057a9c31ce34e277f5dadb27d52eb1261053f027 appears to be missing from the diff.  Conflicting push somewhere?

It's exactly what I'm thinking though.

> #### Namespace scoped policy binding

Reviewer 2: This section title is no longer accurate.

Can we move this "Namespace scoped policy binding" section down to potential future work and instead call this section something like "Per namespace policy params"?

we provided selective access to just some resources, this might become
easier. This can explored as future work.

#### Access to namespace

We have general agreement to grand CEL expression access to namespace through a newly added CEL variable `namespaceObject`.
If the resource is cluster scoped, `namespaceObject` will be null.

> `namespaceObject` will provide access to all existing fields under namespace metadata, namespace spec and namespace status except for metadata.managedFields and metadata.ownerReferences.

Reviewer: if we use the same constructs later for mutation, the namespace finalizers seem likely targets for both read and write.

Author: Yes and we will expose finalizers from both namespace.metadata.finalizers and namespace.spec.finalizers

Reviewer 2: Conceptually, is this the same as `namespaceObject` will provide access to the same fields that are accessible to a CEL expression admissing the namespace object directly?  For consistency, I think this might be what we want.

Reviewer: > Conceptually, is this the same as namespaceObject will provide access to the same fields that are accessible to a CEL expression admissing the namespace object directly? For consistency, I think this might be what we want.

I like that.  Downsides?

we provided selective access to just some resources, this might become
easier. This can explored as future work.

#### Access to namespace

> We have general agreement to grand CEL expression access to namespace through a newly added CEL variable `namespaceObject`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have general agreement to grant CEL expressions access to the admission object's namespace through a newly added CEL variable `namespaceObject`.
```

If the resource is cluster scoped, `namespaceObject` will be null.

`namespaceObject` will provide access to all existing fields under namespace metadata, namespace spec and namespace status except for metadata.managedFields and metadata.ownerReferences.

> The fields could be directly accessed through `namespaceObject` variable. e.g. `namespaceObject.metadata.name` or `namespaceObject.status.phase`.

Reviewer 2: super nit: Can we call this variable `objectNamespace`?  It might be just me, but I'm looking for a name that hints at the fact that this is "the namespace _of_ the object", and when I see `namespaceObject` I interpret it as "a namespace that _is_ an object"

Author: Here is the implementation PR: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/118267 
Maybe we could discuss there and update the KEP later?

- xref: [Metrics Provided by OPA Gatekeeper](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/metrics/)
- xref: [Admission Webhook Metrics](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/#admission-webhook-metrics)

### Future Plan

#### Namespace scoped policy binding

**Note**

> The namespace scoped policy binding will require a new API which could not be easily aligned with existing implementation.

Reviewer: Given that this was previously listed in the KEP, it suggests that the original design didn't meet the design objectives.  It's good that we learned this in alpha instead of beta.  How far off is this design-wise? Let's see a mock up before rushing to a beta that  doesn't meet our goals.

It will be planned separately and will not be affecting the existing ValidatingAdmissionPolicy feature promotion timeline. 

For phase 1, policy bindings were only allowed to be cluster scoped. We can
support namespace scoped policy bindings as follows:

> - Add a `NamespacePolicyBinding` resource.

Author: Based on the discussion in https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uDVjw5G65sVJbCri2aYLDTNACWzLysHAoUgXvSIEOQQ/edit?resourcekey=0-aEDRGTWBeiuRIUcYletCoA#, I have updated this section. Thank you for the input!

  If multiple admission policies require the same conversion, convert only once. 
  From @liggitt: "webhook code loops up one level, first accumulates all the validation webhooks we'll run, then converts to the versions needed by those webhooks then evaluates in parallel"
- authz check to the specific resource referenced in the policy's paramKind. ([comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/113314#discussion_r1013135860))
- complete feature of access to namespace metadata 

> - complete type check for CRD

Reviewer 2: Since we're going to beta, how are we handling backward compatibility?

Author: Thank you for adding the rollout strategy! It is a great way to support adding new stuff.
Beside that, during offline discussion, we don't really care backward compatibility with Alpha feature much since the general suggested practice is to not rollback to a cluster which has alpha feature turned on and we allow breaking changes in alpha phrase. Thank you

Reviewer 2: SGTM

  If multiple admission policies require the same conversion, convert only once. 
  From @liggitt: "webhook code loops up one level, first accumulates all the validation webhooks we'll run, then converts to the versions needed by those webhooks then evaluates in parallel"
- authz check to the specific resource referenced in the policy's paramKind. ([comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/113314#discussion_r1013135860))
- complete feature of access to namespace metadata 
- complete type check for CRD

> - add controlled rollout strategy to support future CEL library/function/variable changes

Reviewer 2: Quantity support +tests?  I'm not confident quantity fields even work in a reasonable today (I hope so, but I don't have any data to support that).

Author: Added

  If multiple admission policies require the same conversion, convert only once. 
  From @liggitt: "webhook code loops up one level, first accumulates all the validation webhooks we'll run, then converts to the versions needed by those webhooks then evaluates in parallel"
- authz check to the specific resource referenced in the policy's paramKind. ([comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/113314#discussion_r1013135860))
- complete feature of access to namespace metadata 
- complete type check for CRD
- add controlled rollout strategy to support future CEL library/function/variable changes
- [Quantity](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/resource/quantity.go#L100) support from CEL expression and tested properly

> - support the list of features mentioned under phrase 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- support the list of features mentioned under phase 2
```

[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name: ValidatingAdmissionPolicy

Reviewer 3: Did we change the feature gate name or was it just wrong in here before?

Reviewer 2: Good question. It was wrong in the KEP but is correct in the code: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/c840c947554e10e6b2918e731c86dbd0e541361a/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/features/kube_features.go#L105

Author: Just FYI: we decided to change the feature gate name while implementing the feature since it better represent the feature, here just as KEP update to reflect what we'v used in code. :)
